# Extract from The State and Revolution
## I – Class society and the State
What is happening today to the doctrine of Marx is what has often happened in history to the doctrines of revolutionary thinkers [...]. The ruling classes have always rewarded the great revolutionaries, during their lifetimes, with incessant persecutions [...]. But, after death, an attempt is made to transform them into harmless icons, [...] to gird their name with a certain halo of glory, as a "consolation" and mystification of the oppressed classes, while their revolutionary doctrine is emptied of its content [...].
This being the case, and since the distortions of Marxism have spread unprecedentedly, our task is first of all to re-establish Marx's true doctrine of the state. [...]
"The State [...] it is [...] a product of society having reached a certain stage of development, it is the confession that this society [...] has split into irreconcilable antagonisms which it is powerless to eliminate. But in order that these antagonisms, these classes with conflicting economic interests, may not destroy themselves and society in a sterile struggle, the need arises for a power that is apparently above society, that mitigates the conflict [...]; and this power which emanates from society, but which places itself above it and which is increasingly alienated from it, is the State. […] The state is the product and manifestation of irreconcilable antagonisms between classes."
[…] the bourgeois ideologues [...] they "correct" Marx in such a way that the state appears as the organ of class conciliation. […] For Marx the state is the organ of class rule, an organ of oppression of one class by another; it is the creation of an "order" that legalizes and consolidates this oppression, moderating the conflict between classes.
[…] It is evident that the liberation of the oppressed class is impossible not only without a violent revolution, but also without the destruction of the apparatus of state power which has been created by the ruling class and in which this "estrangement" has manifested itself. [...]
Why has the need arisen for special detachments of armed men (police, standing army), placed above society and alienating themselves from it? […] because civil society is divided into hostile classes, and moreover irreconcilably hostile, whose "autonomous" arming would determine an armed struggle between them. The State is formed; a distinct force is created, special detachments of armed men are created; […] The oppressed class strives to create a new organization of the same kind, capable of serving not the exploiters, but the exploited. [...]
The state [...] is, as a rule, the state of the most powerful, economically dominant class which, through it, also becomes politically dominant and thus acquires a new instrument to keep the oppressed class subjugated and exploited. [...]
The democratic republic is the best possible political shell for capitalism; That is why capital [...] bases its power so firmly, so securely, that no change in persons, institutions or parties within the bourgeois-democratic republic can shake it. [...]
The petty-bourgeois democrats [...] share and inculcate in the people the false conception that universal suffrage can really express the will of the majority of the working people "in the present state" and ensure its realization. [...]
The society that has existed up to now [...] needed the state, that is, an organization of the exploiting class in every period, in order to preserve the external conditions of its production and therefore especially to keep the exploited class by force in the conditions of oppression given by the existing mode of production [...].
As soon as there are no more social classes to keep in oppression [...] there will be nothing to repress that made a particular repressive force, a state, necessary. […] In place of government over people, the administration of things and the direction of production processes appear. The State is not "abolished": it is extinguished.
The bourgeois state [...] is "abolished" [...]. What is extinguished after this revolution is the proletarian state [...]. […] Only revolution can "abolish" the bourgeois state. "The State is extinguished" [...] is directed both against opportunists and against anarchists. [...]
We are for the democratic republic [...] but we have no right to forget that the fate reserved for the people, even in the most democratic of bourgeois republics, is wage slavery. […] Therefore a state, whatever it is, is not free and is not popular. [...]
In the opportunist falsification of Marxism, the eclectic falsification of dialectics deceives the masses more easily, gives them an apparent satisfaction [...] we recall the conclusion of the Poverty of Philosophy and the Manifesto of the Communist Party which proudly and categorically proclaims the inevitability of violent revolution; we recall the critique of the Gotha program [...] where Marx implacably scourges opportunism [...].
## II – The State and the Revolution. The experience of 1848-1851
"The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest all capital from the bourgeoisie, little by little, to centralize all the instruments of production in the hands of the state, i.e., of the proletariat itself organized as the ruling class, and to increase the mass of productive forces as quickly as possible." [...]
The state is a particular organization of force, it is an organization of violence intended to repress a certain class. […] The workers need the state only to suppress the resistance of the exploiters, and only the proletariat is capable of directing and carrying out this repression [...].
The exploiting classes need political domination for the maintenance of exploitation [...]. The exploited classes need political domination to completely abolish all exploitation [...].
The overthrow of the bourgeoisie is only possible through the transformation of the proletariat into a ruling class, capable of suppressing the inevitable, desperate resistance of the bourgeoisie, of organizing all the working and exploited masses for a new economic regime.
On the other hand, the opportunism that prevails today educates the workers' party in such a way as to make it the representative of the best-paid workers, i.e., renouncing their role as revolutionary leaders of the people in the struggle against the bourgeoisie.
[…] all the previous revolutions did nothing but perfect the machinery of the State, while it must be broken, demolished. […] the proletariat could not overthrow the bourgeoisie without first having conquered political power, without having secured political domination, without transforming the state into a "proletariat organized into a ruling class" [...].
Centralized state power, proper to bourgeois society, appeared in the period of the fall of absolutism. The two most characteristic institutions of this state machine are: the bureaucracy and the standing army. […] The working class learns to know them the hard way.
Imperialism [...] shows in a particular way the extraordinary consolidation of the "state machine", the unprecedented growth of its bureaucratic and military apparatus in order to accentuate the repression against the proletariat [...].
A Marxist is only he who extends the recognition of the class struggle to the recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
## III – The State and the Revolution. The experience of the Paris Commune (1871). Marx's analysis
[…] "The working class cannot simply seize a ready-made state machine and set it in motion for its own ends." […] Marx's idea is that the working class must break, demolish the "ready-made state machine", and not simply take possession of it. [...]
“… The first decree of the Commune was the suppression of the standing army, and the substitution of the armed people for it..." […]. From the members of the Commune downwards, public service was to be performed for workers' wages. […] The magistrates were stripped of that self-styled independence... they had to be elective, accountable, and revocable. […] This is precisely a case of the "transformation of quantity into quality": from bourgeois that it was, democracy [...] has become proletarian [...].
Instead of deciding once every three or six years which member of the ruling class should misrepresent the people in parliament, universal suffrage was to serve the people. [...]
No doubt the way out of parliamentarism is not to destroy representative institutions and the principle of eligibility, but to transform these representative institutions from mills of words into bodies that really "work". […] the real "state" work is carried out behind the scenes, and it is the ministries, the chancelleries, the general staffs that carry it out. In parliaments there is nothing but chatter, with the determined aim of deceiving the "little people". [...]
We cannot conceive of a democracy, even a proletarian democracy, without representative institutions, but we can and must conceive of it without parliamentarism [...] to break immediately the old administrative machine in order to immediately begin to build a new one, which will allow the gradual abolition of all bureaucracy [...] is the primordial and immediate task of the revolutionary proletariat. [...]
We do not "dream" of doing without, from one day to the next, every administration, every subordination [...]. One can and must immediately, from one day to the next, begin to replace the specific "hierarchy" of state officials with the simple functions of "overseers and accountants", [...] for workers' wages.
[…] the technicians, the overseers, the accountants, like all state officials, paid a salary not exceeding the "workman's wage," under the control and direction of the armed proletariat: [...] this is what will rid the working classes of the prostitution of these institutions by the bourgeoisie. [...]
The [...] Common [...] was essentially a government of the working class, the product of the struggle of the producing class against the appropriating class, the political form finally discovered, in which the economic emancipation of labor could be accomplished.
## IV – Continuation. Supplementary explanations by Engels
As for the abolition of the state as an end, we do not at all disagree with the anarchists. We affirm that in order to attain this end it is indispensable to use temporarily, against the exploiters, the instruments, means and methods of state power, just as it is indispensable to establish the temporary dictatorship of the oppressed class in order to suppress the classes. […] if one class systematically uses arms against another class, what is this but a "transitional form" of state? [...]
Take a factory, [...] is it not evident that without a certain subordination [...] it is not possible to operate even one of these complicated technical apparatuses, based on the use of machines and the methodical collaboration of a large number of people? […] [the] most furious anti-authoritarians, Engels writes, could only answer me this: "Ah! That is true, but this is not an authority that we give to delegates, but a task!" […] authority and autonomy are relative notions, that the field of their application varies according to the different stages of social development [...] anti-authoritarians demand that the authoritarian political state be abolished at once, even before the social conditions that gave rise to it have been destroyed [...] or the anti-authoritarians do not know what they are saying [...] or they know it,  and in this case they betray the movement of the proletariat. [...]
The Commune ceased to be a state to the extent that it no longer had to oppress the majority of the population, but a minority (the exploiters); it had broken the machinery of the bourgeois state; Instead of a particular force of oppression, it was the population itself that entered the field. [...]
In the theoretical evaluation [...] of imperialism, [...] capitalism is transformed into monopoly capitalism. […] one of the most widespread errors is the bourgeois reformist assertion that monopoly or state monopoly capitalism is no longer capitalism and can be called "state socialism", [...] trusts cannot regulate the whole economy according to a plan. […] However much the magnates of capital calculate in advance the volume of production on a national and even international scale [...] on the basis of a plan, we nevertheless remain under capitalism, albeit in a new phase [...].
[…] Sacrificing the future of the movement for the present of the movement may be considered honorable, but it is and remains opportunism, and "honorable" opportunism is perhaps the worst of all.
[…] The form of the democratic republic [...] is the specific form for the dictatorship of the proletariat [...] the democratic republic is the shortest road leading to the dictatorship of the proletariat [...] although it does not in any way abolish the rule of capital, [...] it inevitably brings this struggle to such an extent [...] that [...] this possibility is necessarily and solely realized by the dictatorship of the proletariat,  with the leadership of these masses by the proletariat. [...]
Like Marx, Engels defends, from the point of view of the proletariat and the proletarian revolution, democratic centralism, the one and indivisible republic. He regards the federal republic [...] as a transition between the monarchy and the centralized republic [...]. Engels takes into account the obvious fact that the national question has not yet been overcome and therefore recognizes that the Federal Republic would be "a step forward". [...]
For Engels, centralism in no way excludes a large local administrative autonomy, which, by voluntarily maintaining the unity of the state in the "communes" and regions, categorically abolishes all bureaucracy and all "commands" from above. […] The greatest local, regional, etc., freedom that history has known has been given by the centralized republic and not by the federal republic.
[…] After every revolution [...] for the bourgeoisie who were still in charge of the state, the disarmament of the workers was therefore the first commandment.
[…] before the State, religion is nothing but a simple private affair [...] Engels attacked German opportunism in its entirety, which declared religion a private affair vis-à-vis the Party, and thus lowered the party of the revolutionary proletariat to the level of the most vulgar petty-bourgeois "freethinker", who is willing to admit that one can remain outside religion, but denies the Party's task of fighting against religion.  this opium that stupefies the people.
[…] The working class, in order not to lose the power it has just conquered again, must on the one hand eliminate all the old repressive machinery already exploited against it, and on the other hand must insure itself against its deputies and employees, declaring them revocable without exception and at any time.
[…] the State remains the State; that is, it retains its fundamental characteristic: to transform its functionaries, from "servants of society" and its organs, into masters of society.
[…] the Commune [...] elected all administrative, judicial, educational posts, by general suffrage of the interested parties and with the constant right of revocation by them. […] For all the services, high and low, he paid only the salary that the other workers received. […] In this way a sure brake was placed on the hunt for jobs and careerism [...].
[…] in order to abolish the state, it is necessary to transform the functions of the state service into operations of control and registration, so simple as to be within the reach of the immense majority of the population and, subsequently, of the entire population.
[…] In order to completely abolish careerism, it is necessary that an "honorary" state job, even if unpaid, cannot serve as a catwalk to very lucrative jobs in banks and joint-stock companies, as is systematically the case in all capitalist countries, even the freest. [...]
Democracy is a state that recognizes [...] the organization of violence systematically exercised by one class against another, by one part of the population against another. We set ourselves as our ultimate goal the abolition of the state, that is, of all organized and systematic violence, of all violence against men in general.
## V – The economic basis of the extinction of the State
[…] It is historically certain that between capitalism and communism there must necessarily be a [...] transitional stage.
[…] The transition from capitalist society to communist society is impossible without a "political period of transition," and the state of this period can only be the revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat. [...]
Freedom, in capitalist society, always remains more or less what it was in the republics of ancient Greece: freedom for slave owners. Today's wage slaves, as a result of capitalist exploitation, are so suffocated by want and misery that [...] the majority of the population finds itself cut off from political and social life. [...]
Democracy for a tiny minority, democracy for the rich: this is the democratic system of capitalist society. […] The oppressed are allowed to decide, once every few years, which of the representatives of the ruling class will represent and oppress them in parliament!
Progressive development, i.e., evolution towards communism, takes place through the dictatorship of the proletariat, and it cannot be otherwise, for there is no other class and no other means which can break the resistance of the exploiting capitalists. Now, the dictatorship of the proletariat, i.e., the organization of the vanguard of the oppressed into a ruling class in order to suppress the oppressors, cannot be limited to a mere enlargement of democracy. [...] Together with [...] a democracy [...] for the people, [...] and not for the rich, the dictatorship of the proletariat brings about a series of restrictions on the freedom of the oppressors [...].
[…] that is, when [...] there is no longer any distinction between the members of society according to their relations to the social means of production [...], only then "does the state cease to exist and it becomes possible to speak of freedom".
[…] We have, under capitalism, [...] a special machine for the repression of one class by another, and moreover of the majority by the minority. […] Later, in the period of transition from capitalism to communism, repression is still necessary, but it is already exercised by a majority of exploited against a minority of exploiters. The special apparatus, [...] the State, is still necessary, but it is already a transitional state [...].
[…] The people [...] can suppress the exploiters [...] by the mere organization of the masses into arms . . . the Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies . . . […] We are not utopians and we do not exclude the possibility and inevitable of individual excesses, just as we do not exclude the necessity of repressing such excesses. But [...] for this there is no need [...] for a special apparatus of repression; the armed people themselves will take charge of this matter [...]. […] We also know that the main social cause of the excesses that constitute infractions of the rules of social coexistence is the exploitation of the masses [...]. Once this main cause is eliminated, excesses will infallibly begin to "die out". […] And with them also the State.
In the Critique of the Gotha Programme, Marx meticulously refutes Lassalle's idea that the worker should receive under socialism [...] the "full income of his labour". He shows that from the total social product of the whole of society it is necessary to deduct: a reserve fund, a fund for the expansion of production, a fund intended to replenish the "consumed" machinery, etc.; moreover, a fund for administrative expenses, for schools, hospitals, etc., must be deducted from the articles of consumption. [...]
[In a lower phase of communism] The means of production [...] belong to the whole of society. […] After deducting the amount of labor paid into the social funds, each worker receives from society as much as he has given it. […] We do have an "equal right" [...] here, but it is still the "bourgeois right", which [...] presupposes inequality.
[…] For an equal part of the social labour provided, each receives an equal share of the social production (with the deductions indicated above). Individuals, however, are not the same. […] The first phase of communism cannot therefore yet achieve justice and equality; differences of wealth and unjust differences will remain; but the exploitation of man by man will no longer be possible, since it will no longer be possible to take possession of the means of production as private property [...].
Not only does Marx take into account very precisely this inevitable inequality of persons, but he also does not overlook the fact that, by itself, the socialization of the means of production [...] does not eliminate the drawbacks of distribution and the inequality of "bourgeois law" which continues to dominate as long as the products are divided "according to labor."
"He who does not work does not eat": this socialist principle is already realized; "Equal quantity of labour, equal quantity of products": this other socialist principle is also already realized. However, this is not yet communism, it does not yet abolish the "bourgeois right" which attributes to unequal people and for an unequal quantity of labor (in fact unequal) an equal quantity of products. [...]
The state is extinguished to the extent that there are no more capitalists, there are no more classes, and therefore it is no longer possible to repress any class. [...]
As long as the State exists, there is no freedom; when freedom is obtained, there will be no State. The economic condition for the complete withering away of the state is that communism should attain such a high degree of development that all opposition to intellectual and physical labour should disappear, [...] the expropriation of the capitalists will necessarily give a gigantic impetus to the productive forces of human society. [...]
The State will be able to become completely extinct when society has realized the principle: "Each according to his ability; to each according to his needs," that is, when men will have become so accustomed to observing the fundamental rules of social coexistence and work will have become so productive that they will work voluntarily according to their abilities. [...]
From the bourgeois point of view it is easy to declare that such a social system is "pure utopia" [...].  Ignorance, because not a single socialist has ever thought of "promising" the advent of the higher phase of communism: since [...] it presupposes a productivity of labor different from the current one [...] Until the advent of the "highest" phase of communism, socialists demand [...] the expropriation of the capitalists, with the control of the workers over the capitalists, and it must be exercised not by the state of officials, but by the state of armed workers. [...]
Marx analyzes what might be called the degrees of economic maturity of communism. In its first phase, [...] communism cannot be, from the economic point of view, completely mature, completely free from the traditions and vestiges of capitalism. [...]
It follows that under the communist regime there existed, for a time, not only bourgeois law but also the bourgeois state, without the bourgeoisie! [...]
Marx did not arbitrarily introduce into communism a particle of "bourgeois" law; he was only aware of what, economically and politically, is inevitable in a society that has emerged from the bosom of capitalism. [...]
One comes to understand the great importance of the struggle of the proletariat for equality . . . if one understands it correctly, in the sense of the abolition of classes. But democracy means only formal equality. [...]
Democracy is a form of the state [...]. It is therefore, like every state, the organized, systematic application of coercion to men. […] But, on the other hand, democracy is the formal recognition of equality between citizens [...]. It follows that, at a certain stage of its development, democracy first unites the revolutionary class, the proletariat, against capitalism, and gives it the possibility of breaking [...] the bourgeois state machine [...], the standing army, the police, the bureaucracy, and replacing them with a more democratic machine, but which nevertheless remains a state machine,  made up of the armed masses of workers, and then of all the people who participate in the militia. Here "quantity is transformed into quality"; Having reached this stage, the democratic system leaves the framework of bourgeois society and begins to develop towards socialism. If all men really participate in the management of the state, capitalism can no longer sustain itself. [...]
On such economic premises, it is perfectly possible, after having overthrown the capitalists and officials, to replace them immediately, overnight, with armed workers, with the whole people in arms. [...]
All citizens become employees and workers of a single "cartel" of the whole people, of the state. It is all about getting them to work to the same extent, to observe the same measure of labor, and to receive in the same measure. Registration and control in all these fields have been simplified to the extreme by capitalism which has reduced them to extraordinarily simple operations of surveillance and counting, and the issuing of receipts [...].
But this "factory" discipline which the proletariat, having defeated the capitalists and overthrown the exploiters, will extend to the whole of society, is by no means our ideal or our final goal: it is only the necessary stage to radically cleanse society of the ugliness and ignominies of capitalist exploitation and to ensure further progress forward.
## VI – The Degradation of Marxism into the Opportunists
The workers, after having conquered political power, will break up the old bureaucratic apparatus, demolish it from its foundations, leave no stone upon a stone, and replace it with a new apparatus, which will be composed of the same workers and employees; and against the danger of them becoming bureaucrats themselves, the measures meticulously studied by Marx and Engels will be taken immediately: 1) not only eligibility but also revocation at any moment; 2) salary not exceeding the salary of a worker; 3) immediate transition to a situation in which everyone assumes the functions of control and surveillance, in which everyone temporarily becomes a "bureaucrat", and therefore no one can become a "bureaucrat". [...]
Marxists differ from anarchists in this: 1) the former, while setting themselves the goal of the complete abolition of the state, do not consider it achievable until after the abolition of classes by the socialist revolution, as a result of the establishment of socialism which leads to the extinction of the state; the latter want the complete abolition of the State overnight, without understanding what conditions make it possible; (2) the former proclaim the necessity for the proletariat, after it has conquered political power, to completely destroy the old state machine and to replace it with a new one, consisting in the organization of armed workers, on the model of the Commune; the latter, while demanding the destruction of the state machine, represent themselves in a very confused way with what the proletariat will replace it with and how it will use revolutionary power; the anarchists even deny any use of state power by the revolutionary proletariat, its revolutionary dictatorship; 3) the former want the proletariat to prepare for revolution by using the modern state; anarchists are of the opposite opinion.
The revolution must not consist in the new class commanding or governing by means of the old state machine, but that, after breaking it, it commands and governs by means of a new machine. We cannot do without functionaries under capitalism, under the rule of the bourgeoisie. The proletariat is oppressed and the working masses are enslaved by capitalism. […] For this reason, and for this reason alone, in our political and trade union organizations the functionaries are corrupted (or, more precisely, have a tendency to be) by the capitalist environment and manifest an inclination to transform themselves into bureaucrats, that is, into privileged people, detached from the masses and placed above them. […] Until the bourgeoisie has been overthrown, a certain "bureaucratization" of the proletarian functionaries themselves is inevitable.
